OISD -STD-186 
SIMOPS in E&P industry
Presented by:
Milind  Sourabh , SE(P)
Well Services, HSECATEGORIES OF SIMOPS
➢ Allowed subject to normal PTW/ procedural controls : 
In cases where there is no increase in hazards or risk profile by 
performing the activities simultaneously.
➢ Restricted : Potential of hazards or risks could be elevated 
by the SIMOPS, would require restrictions to be imposed and 
planning for contingencies.
Allowed at the discretion of SIMOPS controller with more 
stringent controls over and above work permit.
➢ Not Permitted : Hazards introduced are contributing 
towards extreme risk, the activities should not be conducted 
simultaneously.SIMOPS MANAGEMENT PROCESSWhen the rig is operating inside an installation 
•oil/ gas processing plant 
•producing cluster well in the vicinity of the well under drilling/ workover
•both the facilities shall be defined and considered as a single combined installation .
Do’s and don’ts, Safety Precautions
•Roles and responsibilities
•Accountable (Owner):  Installation Manager  (Rig/Plant)
•Responsible: Safety Officer 
•Operations which have to be stopped/ can be continued / require approval for operations
•Emergency Response Plan
Approvals
•The person responsible for SIMOPS shall be the custodian of the SIMOPS document 
•Custodian to seek approval from the appropriate authority for any deviation/ amendment.
Some Examples
•Movement/Skidding of rig in cluster location
•Drilling/ workover on one well and Activation / wireline job / CTU / Stimulation job on another well in the cluster 
•Drilling rig/ workover rig operating inside the installation.
•One well is under production and the rig building is in progress for drilling second well.
•One or more wells are on production and the drilling/ workover operation is in progress on another well.
SIMULTANEOUS OPERATIONS INVOLVING DRILLING RIG/ WORKOVER RIGPREPARATORY WORK DURING SIMOPS
Display charts/ drawings should be available for ready reckoning for all pipelines to and from the 
cluster location/ installation (identified and tagged) before commencing SIMOPS
The SIMOPS checklist is to be filled up by company man/ installation manager (Rig) and 
installation manager (Production) as shown as Annexure G, to ensure that all preparatory works 
have been completed prior to rig movement.
All Wells shall be checked for annulus pressure build up and checked for integrity, any repair 
work should be taken prior to commencement of SIMOPS
The escape routes of drilling rig/ workover  rig shall be free from any obstruction.
Hazardous zone classification around cluster wells shall be done as per latest guidelines of 
DGMS
The Xmas tree of cluster wells and flow lines/ injection lines shall be protected by means of 
temporary physical barrier above and around it
Minimum three 25 Kg DCP trolley mounted fire extinguishers should be placed in the cluster 
area
Precautions shall be taken while preparing well programme 
(well profile) to avoid below surface collision of the well 
with the neighbouring well otherwise consequences can be 
serious when the producing well is hit.
The cluster wells falling in the movement zone during 
transportation, rig building, rig dismantling of drilling/ work 
over well site area shall not be permitted to flow. The 
cluster wells should be permitted to be flown only after 
taking approval from SIMOPS in charge.
Around the producing wells in the cluster, presence of gas 
should be monitored at predefined intervals and records 
maintained. 
In case of major leakage of oil/gas at the plinth, the 
company man/ rig installation manager (Rig), as the case 
may be, shall stop drilling operation till the leakage is 
rectified and the well has been brought to the safe 
condition. PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN DURING SIMOPS